I would love to learn more about your work as a government policy adviser on AI, infrastructure, education, and smart governance. Could you share about your role in crafting the National AI Roadmap under the Philippine Department of Trade and Industry? In what ways is this project important strategically for the Philippines?
Many enterprises and organizations already consider data science and artificial intelligence (DSAI) as strategic capabilities. They are no longer optional, “nice-to-have” capabilities, but necessary, “must-have” — a matter of organizational survival. Leaders across the world have realized that if they want their organizations to stay relevant, or even to survive, they have to be competitive and innovative. As a result, the embrace of technology has become a necessity, particularly analytics, because of its predictive power.
In recent years, governments have also started to recognize the same thing, and the Philippines is no exception. Like military capabilities, AI is now widely considered a nation-defining capability, especially since AI cuts across industries and sectors.
Ultimately, the Philippine government aims to harness the potential of our people and resources through innovation and entrepreneurship. For example, the local trade ministry, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), is implementing an Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (i3S) specifically to grow innovative and globally competitive industries across the manufacturing, agriculture, and services sectors. DSAI, among other technologies, is front and center in making this possible, driving innovation, digital transformation, and improvements in industry competitiveness.
The DTI had contracted me and my colleague Dr. Chris Monetrola to design and craft the Philippines’ roadmap on AI. Its formulation was our first step towards developing and implementing AI strategies, programs, and projects to especially help local firms become more productive and competitive. Working on the roadmap, I am bringing in my expertise in data-driven science and a wealth of experience working with various stakeholders, particularly on triple helix projects. Another part of my role is to review existing AI policies and strategies published by other countries, to identify best policies and practices that the Philippines could adopt, and to customize and tailor-fit said principles and practices to our culture. Finally, the DTI also tasked us to analyze the country’s policy landscape and ecosystem for AI. Given our past R&D engagements, we also identified DSAI applications with tangible socioeconomic benefits, both short and long term.
What is your favorite project or a project you’re particularly proud of?
Besides designing the National AI Roadmap, I am particularly proud of a recent contact-tracing project with a multinational corporation (the Aboitiz Group), our academic institution (the Asian Institute of Management), various government agencies led by the National Economic Development Authority, and some local government units. The project was a data-for-good volunteer project to boost the country’s contact tracing capabilities, which had previously been identified as the “weakest link” in our government’s COVID-19 response.