Cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin. If you are an internet and social media user in today’s day and age, you must have certainly heard of these terms at some point. As technology develops further and the internet expands, we are continuously improving the way we do things by making them easier and more accessible. Errands such as shopping can be completed with a few simple clicks and this is all done through the use of blockchain technology. But what is blockchain technology and how does it work?​
Blockchain technology is exactly what its name sounds like. It is a chain of blocks, also known as a ledger, which are all linked together and they make online transactions possible and safe. These blocks encapsulate pieces of data and the data inside depends on what type of blockchain is being used. For example, with Bitcoin, the data inside each block contains details about the transaction such as the sender, the receiver and how much money was sent. The blocks also contain hashes and different cryptocurrencies use different hashing algorithms. Just like a fingerprint, each hash is unique and no block has the same hash. The block not only contains the its own unique hash, but also the hash of the previous block too. This is the essential part in creating this ‘chain’ like technology. It also ensures that the transaction is safe and immune to attacks from hackers because if one of the hashes were tampered with, the whole ledger would fail and the transaction wouldn’t go through. Let’s take a look at how this links with cryptocurrency.​
Cryptocurrency is a method of using virtual currency to exchange goods and services and is widely popular due to its immunity to counterfeiting. This is because it is protected by strong and complex algorithms and each user who is part of the transaction has a copy of the ledger meaning if one block was altered, the users would be notified. The most popular cryptocurrency today is Bitcoin but there are many others such as Ethereum, Litecoin and Dogecoin. As Bitcoin is the most popular form of cryptocurrency, let’s take a look at how blockchain technology links to this. With bitcoin, each user has two different keys; a public key and a private key. The public key is an address which every user in the network knows about. The private key is a unique address which only the user has knowledge of, sort of like a password. Thanks to these two keys, users can send money to each other safely without any interception.​
So is cryptocurrency the only thing blockchain technology is used for? Of course not. It is used in many aspects of the digital world today, from online voting, backing up data, keeping medical records and even tracking prescription drugs. All these require a safe and secure way of storing and handling data and blockchain technology provides just the solution for that. But is cryptocurrency really better than paper currency? For starters, you would need to have access to the internet and a device in order to use it, which many people in the world don’t have. Also, although your money is secure online, the internet is littered with viruses and malware and so while cryptocurrency is impenetrable right now, technology advances by the day so who’s to say there won’t be new software developed to exploit the system? ​
We have seen the wonders that blockchain technology has to offer humankind and we have also seen the flaws and defects that come with it too. As we are currently in the age of information and about to enter into the age of experience, new possibilities are arising from every corner of the world and blockchain technology is helping these changes become possible. Yet, with every discovery come the weaknesses and as no technology is completely invulnerable (except maybe quantum computers), we cannot completely depend on cryptocurrency. But who knows, maybe one day we will have developed technology that is beyond our comprehension!