Brain-Computer Interface, otherwise known as BCI, is defined as ‘a direct communication pathway between the brain’s electrical activity and an external device, most commonly a computer or robotic limb’ (Brain-Computer Interface — Wikipedia, 2021). The interface allows the brain to send electrical impulses to control man made equipment such as robotic arms or limbs. This technology combines both neuroscience, computer science and robotics engineering and in this essay, I shall be discussing and evaluating the implication this could have on the progress of society including the advantages and disadvantages.
​
There is no doubt that the advancement of technology has massively enhanced human life and elongated it. People with disabilities now have an opportunity to overcome nearly impossible obstacles all thanks to the new innovations created for them. The BCI allows millions of less able people to have a chance at navigating this world. By providing an interface between the brain and the robotic limbs, they can send impulses from their brains and the robotic limb receives these impulses as electrical signals. Neuroengineer ‘Rajesh Rao’ from the University of Washington describes how BCI was developed as “the understanding of how the brain controls movement led to the development of devices and algorithms that can be implemented on a computer that recognises the patterns of these brain cells and then use that to move an artificial device” (Rao, 2015). With this new technology, people with disabilities have the opportunity to operate their body from just their minds. Not only that, but this interface opens up innumerable possibilities from the operations of robotic limbs to driving cars using simply your brain.
However, is this new discovery a benefit to society or is it more of a hazard? Can it be harnessed and should it be harnessed? While brain-computer interfaces open up a new world of possibilities and opportunities, we cannot ignore the issues that arise with it. New legislation would have to be introduced to ensure that the use of BCI is safe and for good purposes. This would mean alot of money to enforce the law on the country and spent on social services to monitor it. Also, different countries would have different legislation in place which would make cooperation with other nations difficult.