This is one of the essential rules of improvement and behavior change. Do you want why you always forget to take your vitamins? Or why you don’t eat those healthy apples that you just bought? There is an obvious reason behind all this.
Intuition will provide guidance, but the reasons are not obvious. At the first sight, seems to be just an assumption — a piece of information that is accepted as true or as certain, without proof. But looking deeper into the story above, we can find something true. The human brain is in a constant state of unconscious awareness that predicts possible situations. Just like you try guessing your opponent's moves when playing chess, but those are conscious actions. Unconscious awareness is the intuition one builds up through years of experience in a specific field. The ability to understand something intuitively, without recourse to conscious reasoning.
If the major arteries are obstructed, the body will focus on sending blood to critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the skin’s surface. This results in changing the distribution pattern of the blood in the face. After years of working with patients with heart failure, the woman had unconsciously developed the ability to recognize this pattern. Even though she couldn’t say what it was, she knew something was wrong.
I’ve experienced similar situations. With my vast knowledge of persuasion, I usually find myself understanding what one feels in a given situation, even though I only have vague proof behind it. I know when someone tries to persuade me, but here I usually have strong proof to back it up. But sometimes I know something is wrong with the present behavior of a person, even though, at first sight, seems just a meaningless cue. I know it because I unconsciously learn specific behavior patterns for each individual I meet. It starts with the first impression, and within enough time, I build up a picture of the individual. If something seems out of the picture, I will know it. This doesn’t mean that I’m always right. But it seems like I mostly am.
Have you ever asked yourself, why every time you go in the kitchen you find yourself opening the fridge even though you came for a cup of tea? I’m guilty of this habit more than anyone else. My brain learned that the fridge might have a reward for me, like chocolate or a bottle of soda. Surprisingly, this habit persisted even after I moved alone. I decided at one point that I would only keep food that required at least 20 minutes of preparation time. I made this decision because I was overeating. Even so, I was still opening the fridge for no obvious purpose. This time though, there wasn't anything to eat. But I still do it. The cue was still there, so the cue triggered the response without even realizing it. Surprising about our habits is that: we don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to begin.
